# ELITE
ELITE is an MHD stability (eigenvalue) code. It is designed to efficiently evaluate the stability of the edge (or “pedestal”) region of tokamak plasmas, for intermediate to high toroidal mode number instabilities (n~4-50). These instabilities, driven by edge pressure and current gradients, cause Edge Localized Modes (ELMs) and constrain the pressure (or “height”) of the pedestal. The ELITE formalism is derived via an expansion in 1/n to high order, enabling a very efficient and accurate treatment of n>4 instabilities. It is a key component of the EPED model, which is used to predict the pedestal height and width in existing and future tokamaks. ELITE can include compression and toroidal rotation, but is most frequently run without these effects. It is a single fluid code (which typically includes diamagnetic stabilization via analytic models or fits to two-fluid calculations). The present version of ELITE (5.9) requires n>~4, but a version for low n is in progress.

The input to ELITE is a 2D Grad-Shafranov equilibrium solution, which can be generated by one of several equilibrium codes. Most often equilibria come from EFIT (experimental cases) or toq/corsica/helena (model equilibria). Equilibria must be sufficiently high resolution (minimum 129x129 for EFIT), be highly converged Grad-Shafranov solutions (error <~1e-5), and have well resolved pedestal region profiles (including current, usually evaluated with bootstrap models or NEO) in order to be useful to ELITE. ELITE can be used on sets of equilibria (known as “VARYPEDS” as they vary key pedestal parameters). ELITE is used as part of the EPED model to determine the peeling-ballooning constraint (one of two constraints in EPED).

ELITE is a set of three executables (eliteeq, elitevac, elite) that are typically run in sequence. These are f90 codes that typically runs in a few seconds to a minute on modern CPUs. Efficiency is much higher for updown symmetric equilibria and when only a yes/no on stability is required (rather than a growth rate). In most applications (construction of a peeling-ballooning diagram, EPED model) ELITE is run 100s to 1000s of times, and this can be done in parallel on large numbers of cores.

Typical workflows
- Run (parallel) ELITE scan for different modes
- Batch scripts allow multiple (parallel) ELITE runs for multiple modes and different equilibrium variations generated with VARYPED module
- Plotting of s-alpha stability diagrams (interactive, click to see eigenfunction of most unstable mode)
- Parsing and plotting of eigenfunction

Supported devices
- Device independent

Relevant publications
- Snyder, P.; Wilson, H.; Ferron, J.; Lao, L.; Leonard, A.; Osborne, T. & Turnbull, A. Edge localized modes and the pedestal: A model based on coupled peeling-ballooning modes; Physics of Plasmas, 9, 2037 (2002)
- Wilson, H. R., Snyder, P. B., Huysmans, G. T. A., & Miller, R. L. (2002). Numerical studies of edge localized instabilities in tokamaks. Physics of Plasmas, 9(4), 1277-1286

OMEGA INSTALLATION & INSTRUCTIONS

PERLMUTTER INSTALLATION & INSTRUCTIONS





